I need to start by telling you a little
bit about my social life which I know
may not seem relevant but it is when
people meet me at parties and they find
out that I'm an English professor who
specializes in language they generally
have one of two reactions one set of
people look frightened they often say
something like oh I better be careful
what I say
I'm sure you'll hear every mistake I
make and then they stop talking and they
wait for me to go away and talk to
someone else the other set of people
their eyes light up and they say you are
just the person I want to talk to and
then they tell me about whatever it is
they think is going wrong with the
English language a couple of weeks ago I
was at a dinner party and the man to my
right started telling me about all the
ways that the internet is degrading the
English language he brought up Facebook
and he said to defriend I mean is that
even a real word I want to pause on that
question what makes a word real my
dinner companion and I both know what
the verb defriend means so when does a
new word like D friend become real who
has the authority to make those kinds of
official decisions about words anyway
those are the questions I want to talk
about today I think most people when
they say a word isn't real what they
mean is it doesn't appear in a standard
dictionary that of course raises a host
of other questions including who writes
dictionaries before I go any further let
me
clarify my role in all of this I do not
write dictionaries I do however collect
new words much the way dictionary
editors do and the great thing about
being a historian of the English
language is that I get to call this
research when I teach the history of the
English language I require that students
teach me two new slang words before I
will begin class over the years I have
learned some great new slang this way
including hangry which
which is when you are cranky or angry
because you are hungry and adorkable
which is when you are adorable in kind
of a dorky way clearly terrific words
that fill important gaps in the English
language but how real are they if we use
them primarily as slang and they don't
yet appear in a dictionary with that
let's turn to dictionaries I'm going to
do this as a show of hands how many of
you still regularly refer to a
dictionary either print or online okay
so that looks like most of you now a
second question again a show of hands
how many of you have ever looked to see
who edited the dictionary you are using
okay
many fewer at some level we know that
there are human hands behind
dictionaries but we're really not sure
who those hands belong to I'm actually
fascinated by this even the most
critical people out there tend not to be
very critical about dictionaries not
distinguishing among them and not asking
a whole lot of questions about who
edited them just think about the phrase
look it up in the dictionary which
suggests that all dictionaries are
exactly the same consider the library
here on campus where you go into the
reading room and there is a large
unabridged dictionary up on a pedestal
in this place of honor and respect lying
open so we can go stand before it to get
answers now
don't get me wrong dictionaries are
fantastic resources but they are human
and they are not timeless I'm struck as
a teacher that we tell students to
critically question every text they read
every website they visit except
dictionaries which we tend to
treat as an author as if they came from
nowhere to give us answers about what
words really mean here's the thing if
you ask dictionary editors what they'll
tell you is they're just trying to keep
up with us as we change the language
they're watching what we say and what we
write and trying to figure out what's
going to stick and what's not going to
stick they have to gamble because they
want to appear cutting-edge and catch
the words that are going to make it such
as lol but they don't want to appear
faddish and include the words that
aren't going to make it and I think a
word that they're watching right now is
Yolo you only live once now I get to
hang out with dictionary editors and you
might be surprised by one of the places
where we hang out every January we go to
the American dialect Society annual
meeting where among other things we vote
on the word of the year there are about
two or three hundred people who come
some of the best known linguists in the
United States to give you a sense of the
flavor of the meeting it occurs right
before happy hour anyone who comes can
vote the most important rule is that you
can vote with only one hand in the past
some of the winners have been tweet in
2009 and hashtag in 2012 Chad was the
word of the year in the year 2000
because who knew what a Chad was before
2000 and WMD in 2002 now we have other
categories in which we vote too and my
favorite category is most creative word
of the year past winners in this
category have included recombobulator
area which is at the Milwaukee Airport
after security where you can
recombobulator
can put your belt back on put your
computer back in your bag and then my
all-time favorite word at this vote
which is multi-slacking
and multi-slacking is the act of having
multiple windows up on your screen so it
looks like you're working when you're
actually goofing around on the web we'll
all of these words stick absolutely not
and we have made some questionable
choices for example in 2006 when the
word of the year was Pluto to mean
demoted
but some of the past winners now seem
completely unremarkable such as app and
E as a prefix and Google as a verb now a
few weeks before our vote Lake Superior
State University issues its list of
banished words for the year what is
striking about this is that there's
actually often quite a lot of overlap
between their list and the list that we
are considering for words of the year
and this is because we're noticing the
same thing we're noticing words that are
coming into prominence it's really a
question of attitude are you bothered by
language pads and language change or do
you find it fun interesting something
worthy of study as part of a living
language the list by Lake Superior State
University continues a fairly long
tradition in English of complaints about
new words so here is Dean Henry Alford
in 1875 who is very concerned that
desirability is really a terrible word
in 1760 Benjamin Franklin wrote a letter
to David Hume who giving up the word
colonize as bad over the years we've
also seen worries about new
pronunciations here is Samuel Rogers in
1855 who's concerned about some
fashionable pronunciations that he finds
offensive and he says as if contemplate
were not bad enough balcony makes me
sick
the word is borrowed in from Italian and
it was pronounced balconey these
complaints now strike us as quaint if
not downright adorable
but here's the thing we still get quite
worked up about language change I have
an entire file in my office of newspaper
articles about who art which expressed
concern about illegitimate words that
should not have been included in the
dictionary including lol when it got
into the oxford english dictionary and
defriend when it got into the oxford
american dictionary I also have articles
expressing concern about invite as a
noun impact as a verb because only teeth
can be impacted and incentivize is
described as boorish bureaucratic
misspeak now it's not that dictionary
editors ignore these kinds of attitudes
about language they try to provide us
some guidance about words that are
considered slang or informal or
offensive often through usage labels but
they're in something of a bind because
they're trying to describe what we do
and they know that we often go to
dictionaries to get information about
how we should use a word well or
appropriately in response the american
heritage dictionary z' include usage
notes usage notes tend to occur with
words that are troublesome in one way
and one of the ways that they can be
troublesome is that they're changing
meaning now usage notes involve very
human decisions and I think as
dictionary users we're often not as
aware of those human decisions as we
should be to show you what I mean we'll
look at an example but before we do I
want to explain what the dictionary
editors are trying to deal with in this
usage note think about the word peruse
and how you use that word I would guess
many of you are thinking of skim scan
reading quickly some of you may even
have some walking involved because
you're perusing grocery store shelves
something like that
you might be surprised to learn that if
you look at most standard dictionaries
that the first definition will be to
read carefully or pour over American
heritage has that as the first
definition they then have as the second
definition
skim and next to that they say usage
problem and then they include a usage
note which is worth looking at so here's
the usage note peruse has long meant to
read thoroughly but the word is often
used more loosely to mean simply to read
further extension of the word to mean to
glance over or skim has traditionally
been considered an error but our ballot
results suggest that it is becoming
somewhat more acceptable when asked
about the sentence I only had a moment
to peruse the manual quickly 66% of the
usage panel found it unacceptable in
1988 58% in 1999 and 48% in 2011 the
usage panel that trusted body of
language authorities who is getting more
lenient about this now what I hope
you're thinking right now is wait who's
on the usage panel and what should I do
with their pronouncements if you look in
the front matter of American Heritage
Dictionary you can actually find the
names of the people on the usage panel
but who looks at the front matter of
dictionaries there are about 200 people
on the usage panel
they include academics journalists
creative writers so there's a Supreme
Court justice on it and a few linguists
as of 2005 the list includes me
Cheers here's what we can do for you we
can give you a sense of the range of
opinions about contested usage that is
and should be the extent of our
Authority we are not a Language Academy
about once a year I get a ballot that
asked me about whether new uses new
pronunciations new meanings are
acceptable
now here's what I do to fill out the
ballot I listen to what other people are
saying and writing I do not listen to my
own likes and dislikes about the English
language I will be honest with you I do
not like the word impactful but that is
neither here nor there in terms of
whether impactful is becoming common
usage and becoming more acceptable in
written prose so to be responsible what
I do is go look at usage which often
involves going to look at online
databases such as Google Books well if
you look for impactful in Google Books
here's what you find well it sure looks
like impactful is proving useful for a
certain number of writers and has become
more and more useful over the last
twenty years now there are going to be
changes that all of us don't like in the
language there are going to be changes
where you think really does the language
have to change that way what I'm saying
is we should be less quick to it to
decide that that change is terrible we
should be less quick to impose our likes
and dislikes about words on other people
and we should be entirely reluctant to
think that the English language is in
trouble it's not it is rich and vibrant
and filled with the creativity of the
speakers who speak it in retrospect we
think it's fascinating that the word
nice used to mean silly and that the
word decimate used to mean to kill one
in every 10
we we think that Ben Franklin was being
silly to worry about notice as a verb
well you know what we're gonna look
pretty silly in a hundred years for
worrying about impact as a verb and
invite as a noun the language is not
going to change so fast that we can't
keep up language just doesn't work that
way I hope that what you can do is find
language change not worrisome but fun
and fascinating just the way dictionary
editors do I hope you can enjoy being
part of the creativity that is
continually remaking our language and
keeping it robust so how does a word get
into a dictionary it gets in because we
use it and we keep using it and
dictionary editors are paying attention
to us if you're thinking but that lets
all of us decide what words mean I would
say yes it does
and it always has dictionaries are a
wonderful guide and resource but there
is no objective dictionary Authority out
there that is the final arbiter about
what words mean if a community of
speakers is using a word and knows what
it means it's real that word might be
slangy that word might be informal that
word might be a word that you think is
illogical or unnecessary but that word
that we're using that word is real thank
you
[Applause]